
# Tools for Identifying Partisan Gerrymandering

## With an Application to Congressional Districting in Pennsylvania

**Key Words**: gerrymandering, Pennsylvania Supreme Court, redistricting,
League of Women Voters, good government

*In League of Women Voters v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (2018) the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court struck down as a "severe and durable"
partisan gerrymander the congressional map drawn by Republicans in 2011
and used in elections from 2012-2016. It did so entirely on state law
grounds after a three-judge federal court had rejected issuing a
preliminary injunction against the plan. After Pennsylvania failed to
enact a lawful remedy plan of its own (due to total disagreement as to
how to proceed between the newly elected Democratic governor and the
still Republican-controlled legislature), the Court then ordered into
place for the 2018 election a map of its own drawn for it by a
court-appointed consultant. In a split court, the Court map was endorsed
only by judges with Democratic affiliations. Here we compare the 2011
and 2018 congressional maps in terms of a variety of proposed metrics
for detecting partisan gerrymandering. We also examine the remedy map
proposed by a group of Republican legislators and that proposed by the
Democratic governor. In addition, we briefly comment on what can be
learned from congressional maps drawn conforming either entirely or
substantially to what are often referred to as "good government"
standards \-- most of which make no use of election outcome or party
registration data. We conclude that the 2011 map was a blatant and
undisguised pro-Republican gerrymander, but that, as we would expect,
the 2018 court-drawn remedial map cannot be classified as a gerrymander.
Moreover, the 2018 remedy map proposed by Republican legislators was a
covert pro-Republican gerrymander (what we refer to as a \`\`stealth
gerrymander"), while that proposed by the Democratic governor cannot be
classified as a gerrymander.*
